# riboswitch-classifier
Riboswithes are 5’UTR(Un-Translated Regions) that regulate gene expression at the Translational level in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes . Riboswitches depending on the secondary structure conformation they exhibit upon exposure to stimuli such as macromolecules, temperature and light will either facilitate or inhibit translation. Current methods to characterize riboswitches are tedious(require elaborate experiments with wide range of controls), time consuming and costly. We propose using a Machine Learning model called a Multi-Layer Perceptorn to be trained on data and appropriate hyperparameters to detect the class of a particular riboswitch on sequence input. Pre-training the model is necessary, specifically feature extraction containing th mono-nucleotide and di-nucleotide frequencies of the riboswitch class is necessary. The data is obtained from the R-fam database in FASTA format. The model has been calibrated to accommodate different range of classes : 2-class, 4-class, 8-class, 12-class and 16-class. The chosen evaluation metric is the f-score which is calculated by precision-recall diagnostics. The model data is also split into training-test-dev sets to eliminate any avoidable bias and avoidable variance. This classifier will be capable of classifying a riboswitch upon sequence input without the need for tedious and costly assays. An additional advantage would be that this classifier can be added to the sequencing pipeline so as to integrate the process of sequencing and profiling genes.
